

COORG.
Bituation, boun- daries & extent. The principality of Coorg, or Kodoogoo as it is
called by the natives, is situated in the line of the
western ghauts, between latitude 12° , and 12 ° 52' North,
and longitude 75° 30 ′ , and 76° 10' East ; its dimensions are,
length 58 miles, and greatest breadth 25 miles ; it however
varies in breadth considerably, and on a rough computation,
its surface may be stated to be about 1420 square miles. It
is bounded on the north and east by Mysore, on the south by
Wynaad, and on the west by Malabar and South Canara,
which are interposed between it and the sea ; its distance
from which is in most places about 45 miles. It is strictly
speaking a mountain region, the lowest part being elevated
not less than 3,000 feet above the sea.
Generaldescrip- tionofthe coun- try.
The entire country consists of a succession
of lofty narrowridges having valleys of various
extent between them, the ridges, lie parallel to each other,
commencing in general with a steep abutment to the westward, and running in the general direction of the western
ghauts, viz. from north-west to south- east, until they terminate in the plains of Mysore and Wynaad ; of these numerous ridges the following are the most remarkable.
The first to the north-ward rises above the Bizlee ghaut,
and terminates at the Cauvery, near RamasamyConawah, and
is ofno great elevation ; it separates the districts of Yellooserza-shee-mee to the north, from the rest of Coorg.
Next to this, with the table land of Somwarpett intervening, is a ridge, the western extremity of which commences by
a remarkable bluff peak of considerable elevation , called
Poopayherry or Soobramuny, well known as a land mark ;
and which is regarded with superstitious veneration, the
natives ofthe country considering it unlucky to ascend it, exA
20
COORG
cept as a penance to wipe away sin. The scenery round its
base is bold , rocky and grand, and towards Somwarpett, it
becomes exceedingly picturesque, forming a succession of
beautiful grassy downs, open glades, and clumps of forest
trees, resembling the finest park scenery in Europe.
The next ridge in succession has three rather marked
rocky peaks, the sides of which slope abruptly to the north
and south, into two deep valleys, through which run the
branches of the Haringhee river ; the scenery here is also
verypleasing.
After this comes the table land of Merkara, which is terminated on the south by a sharp declivity of 5 or 600 feet,
forming the northern boundary of the great valley between
Merkara and Nakanaad ; it is about 18 miles in length by 13
in breadth, and consists of a succession oflow narrow ridges,
with fertile valleys interposed ; the lowest, being nearly in the
centre, forms the bed of the river Cauvery. At the northwest angle of this valley there is a break in the line of ghauts,
forming what is called the Sumpajee valley, which leads by a
gradual slope into the low country. The southern termination of the valley however, becomes abrupt, a ridge in this
direction rising suddenly to the height of about 1000 feet ;
and on the west it plunges still more suddenly into Malabar,
by a fall of between 4 and 5000 feet. It presents sundry
peaks the most remarable of which is Tadiandamole, the
highest in Coorg.
A continuation of the valley to the south- east, leads into
the talook of Kiggutnaad, which is of considerable extent, but
much overgrown with jungle ; and further to the south - east
rise the Brummagherry mountains, forming the boundary of
the country in this direction ; they are of considerable elevation , covered with forest trees, and abound in game ; like the
other mountains of Coorg, the ridge on the top is very narrow.
The general aspect of the country varies considerably in
the different talooks . In the vicinity of Somwarpett, the hills
are gently rounded, alternating with sloping glades, inter-
COORG
spersed with clumps of forest trees ; near Merkara the hills
are closer together, and more abrupt, the ravines deeper, and
more wild, and the jungle in the hollows much thicker.
South of Merkara the country appears covered with wood,
the only naked spots being the narrow cultivated valleys between the ridges ; on descending into it however, it is found to
contain numerous open spaces, the woods being neither dense,
nor lofty. Kiggutnaad is thickly wooded, and the whole eastern
frontier of the country bordered with jungle more or less
dense, varying in breadth from 8, to 15 miles, and communicating with the jungles of Wynaad, and Mysore.
The scenery along the ridge of the ghauts to the westward
is very beautiful, and though less rocky and grand than that of
the Neilgherries, it is bold and varied in a high degree , the
vegetation being of the richest description, and the forest trees
of magnificent growth.
The valleys between the ridges, though varying in extent
and relative depth, from having the same general direction, —
i. e. from north-west to south- east,-as the monsoon winds,
the temperature of the country is thereby considerably moderated, and rendered equable.
Breastworks.
Cuddinegs. or Aremarkable feature ofthe country, and which
attracts the attention of the most casual observer,
is the number and extent of the Cuddinegs, or breastworks,
which surround and intersect it in every direction. Their
total linear extent, -being in many places, double, triple or
quadruple -cannot be short of 5 or 600 miles ; and when it is
stated, that they are generally from 15 to 25 feet high, with a
ditch in front of 10 feet deep, by 8, or 10 wide, some idea may
be formed of the labour bestowed in their formation. The natives are entirely ignorant of the period of their construction ,
and of the purposes for which they were intended, generally
attributing them to the Pandeoos or sons of Siva. That they
are the works of a very remote antiquity is evident from the
loss of all tradition regarding their uses, as well as from the
more unequivocal testimony of enormous trees, probably the
4 COORG
growth of ages, which are found springing out ofthe walls. No
satisfactory reason for their construction has yet been assigned ;
defence could not have been the only object, as they face one
another in certain places, and in others, three or four ranges
are found directly behind each other.
Subjoined are the elevations above the sea, of some of the
more remarkable points in Coorg.
Poopagherry...
Tadiandemole near Nakanah...
Merkara (B. W. ) ...
Nakanaad palace ( B. W. ) ....
Soorlaby, northern range ( B. W.) . . . .
Bittatoor table land, ( W. S. W. of Merkara)
(B. W. ).....
Veerajunderpett palace ( B. W.) ……………….
Highest point of great road from Merkara to Frazerpett (L.) . ...
3 mile stone Do. (L.).
Bhoeekerry hill Do. ( L.) . .
Frazerpett Do. ( L. ) ......
....
Coloor Betta (near Frazerpett) ( L. ) ....
Rivers
Feet 5,682
99 5,781
• 99 4,506
3,797 وو
4,527 دو
99 4,824
39 3,399
4,781
• "" 4,500
99 4,500
» 3,200
"9 4,500
The principal river of Coorg is the Cauvery,
by means of which and its tributaries, nearly four-fifths of
the country is drained. The only river of considerable size
flowing to the westward, is the Burrepollay, which rises in
Kiggutnaad, and descending abruptly through a series of
deep and rocky ravines, in one of which it forms a superb
cascade 2 or 300 feet high, flows along the base of the hills,
by the Huggala ghaut, where it is known as the stony
river, and disembogues itself into the sea a few miles north
of Cannanore.
The Cauvery rises near the top of a hill , on the very verge
of the western ghauts, and descending through the great
valley between Merkara, and Nakanaad, makes a sudden
turn to the north, and flows for 20 or 30 miles along the
(B. W.) ascertained by boiling water, ( L. ) by levels taken in constructing the new road.
COORG 5
eastern frontier, receiving in its course several large tributaries, the principal of which is the Soornauretty, or Haringhee, which drains the northern half of the country, and enters the Cauvery between Frazerpett and Ramasamy
Conawah. Another large tributary of the Cauvery is
the Litchman- tierth , which rises at the foot of the Brummagherries, flows north-east into Mysore, and joins the
Cauvery close to Hoonsoor .
The Cauvery is not rapid in any part of its course through
Coorg, and its current is in general tranquil, except at a
few places where it traverses beds of granite rock ; it is fordable at almost all points in the dry season, but during the
monsoon at Frazerpett, where it is 225 feet wide, it rises to
the height offrom 20, to 30 feet.
Morasses .
There are no lakes in any part of Coorg, and
but few morasses or bogs, except on the site of deserted rice
fields, from which however no noxious exalations appear to
arise.
Climate.
ranges.
The temperature of Coorg is moderate and
equable, the daily range of the thermometer within doors, not
Thermometric exceeding 6° or 8°, often not more than 2º ; the
thermometer seldom rises higher than 74 °, or falls below
60°, in the open air. The range is a little higher during
the dry season, when the daily extremes are from 52° or 53º,
to 68º or 70º ; the annual extremes are probably 52º, and 82º.
Barometrical observations. The maximum height of the barometer occurs
during the dry season, when the mercury stands at
26.220, and the lowest in July, during the monsoon, when it
falls to 25°. 912. The greatest daily range observed has been,
076' ; the mean daily range, which is very regular being 050 .
The diurnal maximum occurs at 10 A. M. and the minimum at
5 P. M., with such regularity, that errors in the supposed
time, have often been detected by reference to the barometer.
This instrument however offers no indication of approaching changes of weather, nor has it been observed to be influenced by the lunar phases.
6 COORG
Hygrometer. The hygrometrical state of the atmosphere,
during half the year, is that of extreme moisture, closely
approaching to saturation. During the hot season it is occasionally very dry, and sometimes undergoes most remarkable fluctuations without evident cause, and without any perceptible difference either to the eye , or to the feelings.
Detailed obser- vations on cli- mate.
Afew detailed observations on the climate,
at different seasons of the year, are here given.
The months of January and February are cold, and excessively dry, the range of temperature being from 53° , to 70°,
or 72° ; the mornings and evenings are to the feelings
very cold, while the heat of the sun, in the middle of
the day, is tempered by a constant cool breeze, from the
north-east, which frequently blows with such violence, as
to raise clouds of dust, and become unpleasant.
In March, the cold of the nights becomes less sensible, and
the days are warmer, while the wind is less violent, the air
still continues in general dry, but fluctuates considerably in
this respect.
April and May are usually very pleasant months, the
heat of the day which begins to be oppressive out of doors,
being tempered by frequent heavy showers, and thunder
storms ; occasionally, though rarely, the air is close, but the
nights are almost always cool.
In June, the monsoon sets in, and at the commencement is
seldom violent, but about the end of the month the rain
frequently falls in torrents. Between the 22d and 27th ofJune
1835, there fell twenty seven inches of rain, nearly equal to
the aggregate annual fall in England ; rain continues during
July, August and September, the air becomes loaded with
moisture, the sun is seldom seen ; and when it ceases during
short intervals , a dense fog usually prevails. The temperature at this season is wonderfully equable, the extremes
ofthethermometer in the open air, being 56 ° , and 65º .
In October, an interval of bright and beautiful weather
generally occurs, rendered the more delightful by contrast,
COORG 7
and by the intense green of the luxuriant vegetation ; about
the commencement of the month the wind sets in from the
north-east, and when strong, is piercingly cold.
November is an unpleasant month, the weather being
blustery, cold and showery, and there are frequent cold
heavy fogs.
In December, fogs are prevalent, but towards the end
of the month the weather becomes settled, when it is clear
and cold, the mornings and evenings being intensely cold to
the feelings.
Salubrity of the climate forEuro- peans.
As respects the very important point of health,
there can be no hesitation in stating, that the
climate of Coorg appears to be well adapted to the European
constitution, provided there exists no tendency to visceral
congestion.
In the great majority of Europeans, the equability ofthe
temperature, the average of which 60°, is that generally
considered most favorable to health-- the coolness of the nights,
and, the advantage of being able to take exercise in the open
air at all hours, during a considerable portion of the year,
exert a most beneficial influence as regards health, strength
and appearance ; European children are likewise strong and
healthy. No slight proof of the congeniality of the climate
for Europeans, is the fact , that dogs of the European
breed, thrive remarkably well in Coorg, and are exempt
from many diseases common to them even in southern Europe.
To the same cause, equability of temperature, the comparative immunity from rheumatic affections, coughs, colds &c.
which is here enjoyed , may be attributed ; although the atmosphere is, throughout a great part of the year, loaded with
moisture.
Diseases which'
become ag- gravated by
Certain complaints such as asthmatic affections,
the climate are generally aggravated by a residence in the of Coorg. upper parts of Coorg, and the rarefaction of
the air may probably be sufficient to account for this cir-
8 COORG
cumstance ; chronic affections of the liver, are also apt to put
on a more formidable appearance, partly from checked perspiration, in the damp cold seasons of the year, and the want
of exercise during the monsoon ; in dysenteric complaints
when the tone of the intestinal canal has been much impaired by the disease, great care is necessary to prevent diarrhoea supervening, which is at all times obstinate, and frequently resists every means of cure , unless change of climate is restored to ; Frazerpett is of great advantage in this
respect, affording a considerable change, within a short
distance.
Effect of cli- mate on Na- tives of the Natives ofthe low country suffer a good deal,
Country. on first arriving in Coorg, from fever of the intermittent type and bowel complaints, occasioned in a great
measure by their being imperfectly clothed, by sleeping on
the ground, and indulging in the use of raw vegetables ; on
becoming acclimated however, they enjoy as good health as
in the most favorable parts of the low country, and strange
as it may appear, the monsoon season seems to agree best with
them.
A few casualties which have lately occurred , have been
principally from congestion of the lungs, always a formidable
complaint in natives ; the climate appears decidedly inimical,
to the cure ofcuts, wounds and sores, which are often totally
unmanageable, without change of air. This is a peculiarity
it is believed of other moist climates of India ; such as the
coasts of Malabar, Bombay, Aracan, and Tenasserim .
The tables appended contain an abstract of a daily atmospherical register kept with but little intermission, from 1st
June 1835 , to the 31st May 1837, and though imperfect from
unavoidable circumstances, will suffice to give a general idea
of the climate. See table at the end of the report.
Geological fea- tures of the country.
The geological formation ofthe country in the
vicinity of Merkara, bears a close resemblance
to that ofthe Neilgherries as described by Dr. Benza. * The
* Journal of Madras Asiatic Society No. 13, page 241.
COORG
rocks are primitive, consisting mostly of sienite, occasionally
traversed by green stone, the whole being covered with a thick
cap of lithomargic earth, composed of felspar in various
stages ofdecomposition, the agglutinating basis being argillaceous earth, coloured by oxide of iron. In some places the
agglutination is so complete as to form laterite, or soap stone,
and the whole is traversed by veins of quartz, and of nearly
pure felspar ; the latter also occurs totally decomposed, in
which state it is commonly called porcelain earth, and is used
as a white wash for houses, and for cleaning soldier's belts &c.
The greenstone traverses the sienite at several places to
the south of Merkara, but the section is imperfectly seen, it
is of a very hard texture and receives a beautiful polish, and
is occasionally found with minute crystals of pink felspar interspersed through it, but these disappear in the polishing ;
the section presents a uniform smooth surface, of a darkblackish green colour* . The sienite is an admirable building stone, but its hardness renders it too expensive for
common use.
Immediately over the lithomargic earth, is a stratum varying greatly in thickness , of rich vegetable mould, resulting
from the decomposition of the luxuriant vegetation with
which the whole country is clothed, during the greater part
of the year ; on the edges and slopes of the hills this stratum
of earth is comparatively thin, but in the valleys and hollows
into which it is washed by the heavy rains, along with a vast
quantity of heterogeneous detritus, it accumulates to a great
thickness, and forms a soil of great fertility, producing, with
very little assistance from manure, returns of from 50, to 80
fold.
Water.
Water is in general of good quality, but
during the monsoon it is necessarily charged with considerable quantities of silt and mud, washed down from the
higher grounds.
* A small slab of this description found in the palace at Merkara, is said to have been used as a mirror ; some large blocks ( 4 feet by 24 and 6 or 8 inches thick) were made into couches, which at the sale of prize property produced large prices.
B
10 COORG
Causes of fever and bowel com- plaints.
The climate in many places, for two months
previous to the setting in ofthe monsoon, when
frequent heavy showers fall , is more or less unhealthy, and
fever and bowel complaints prevail to some extent, which the
natives attribute to the mixture of the old and new waters
as they express it ; and there can be no doubt, that the first
portions of water which percolate through the ground, after
a long period of dry weather, becoming charged with saline
particles, and decaying animal or vegetable matter, must be
more or less deleterious. Europeans are more in the habit
of attributing epidemics to noxious exhalations, but it is dif
ficult to account, on the score of malaria alone, for the season
preceding the monsoon being the most unhealthy, in the
south of India, while in Candeish, the terraie of Bengal &c.
the close of the rains is the most sickly season .
The period at which the military suffer most is the dry
weather, evidently from exposure to the greater variations of
temperature, which occur in that season, and to which
their duty as guards and sentries at night subjects them.
Their febrile complaints however never put on the malarious, or intermittent type, and are rarely dangerous except
when complicated with pulmonary affections.
Botanyof Coorg. The botany of Coorg is as yet an unexplored
field, and would amply repay the attention of a competent
observer.
Rice.
Rice which forms the staple article of the country, is of a coarse quality and not esteemed in Mysore or to
the eastward, three varieties of it are produced, and the principal market for the surplus which is considerable is Malabar.
Raggy. Raggy is cultivated in the lower parts of the
country, to a considerable extent ; in the upper country, it
Particularly in Kiggutnaad, and the jungles on the eastern border of the country where fevers are so prevalent at this season as to be called Rog or Epidemic. The same is the case in the jungles surrounding the base of the Neilgherries.
COORG 11
is confined to patches of ground on the slopes of the hills,
from which the jungle has been cleared, and the grass burnt
for manure ; only one crop is raised, after which the ground
is allowed to lie fallow for some years, before being cultivated, when the same process is again repeated.
Tobacco.
Tobacco of an inferior sort, is grown in small
quantities, as also hemp, ginger and turmeric for domestic
uses ; coffee grows wild on the eastern border, and might
be much improved.
Cardamoms.
Cardamoms are found in great abundance and
of good quality, in the jungles , along the western slope of the
ghauts, and produce a considerable revenue ; the wild nutmeg is also very common.
Nutmegs.
Sandal wood.
Of the more important productions of the jungles, may be enumerated sandal wood, produced chiefly on the
eastern border of the country.
Teak wood &c. Teak wood grows on the malabar side of the
ghauts, also chunpunee, blackwood, darcheenee, and many
other valuable timber trees.
Cucurbitaceous plants.
Cucumbers and most plants of the cucurbitaceous tribe grow luxuriantly, and there is no doubt that almost all
European vegetables, and some fruits, might be brought to
perfection in various parts of the country.
mals.
Domestic ani- Ofthe domestic animals found in Coorg, the
bullock is much the most common ; it is of a small breed, and
does not thrive in the upper country ; the same is the case
with sheep ; but goats thrive better ; horses are only kept
by a few people of the higher ranks.
Wild animals. Ofthe numerous wild animals, the most remarkable is, the elephant, large herds of which are found in all
Elephants. &c. the jungly parts of the country, and they often do
muchinjury to the crops. They are occasionally killed by large
12 COORG
parties of hunters assembled for the purpose, and since a
reward for destroying them has been granted , numbers are
shot annually by individual sportsmen. They are occasionally caught in pits and tamed, but are considered inferior
to those of Ceylon, or Bengal.
Tigers are frequently met with, as are also cheetas and
tiger cats ; they appear to lose much of their ferocity in this
climate, and seldom attack a man unless wounded.
Bears are comparatively rare ; they appear to resemble
those found on the Neilgherries, but differ from them in one
remarkable particular, being exceedingly fierce, and more
dreaded by the Coorgites than tigers.
The wild dog ken-nai, sonakoota, or d'hole, is frequently
met with in packs of ten or twelve ; they are as large as a.
greyhound, stronger built, and very fierce, they have been
known to attack bullocks.
Several species of martens, polecats and weasels are
met with.
The samber or elk is common in the more retired jungles,
and the animal is hunted for its flesh, which is esteemed by
the natives.
The bison as it is called is common on all the mountain
ridges, where it attains to the enormous size of 17 hands
high, and upwards.
The muntjak (cervus muntjak, of Cuvier ) or jungle sheep,
as it is sometimes called , is not uncommon, but is shot with
difficulty from its frequenting the thickest coverts ; it is distinguished by having canine teeth in the upper jaw, and
hair covered bony processes on its skull of about four inches in
length, on which the horns are supported , its flesh is much
esteemed. The memina, or mouse deer is occasionally seen ;
its flesh is also considered a delicacy. The cheetul or spotted
deer, and wild hog, and large sized hares are found in great
COORG 13
numbers, in the more open parts of the country. The woods
are tenanted by troops ofmonkeys, and squirrels ; of the latter
there are three or four varieties.
Birds.
Ofthe feathered tribe, the most remarkable are,
the wood-cock, which is comparatively rare, and evidently
migratory; the snipe, found in considerable numbers, jungle and
spur-fowl, several species of cranes ; Pigeons are also numerous, including the imperial pigeon, blue pigeon, the green dove
a beautiful bird, and the common dove. Falcons and hawks
are numerous, as are also one or two descriptions of eagle ;
wood-peckers exist in great variety, and of the most beautiful
plumage. The baceros rhinoceres, or hornbill, of two or
three varieties is found common in all parts of the country.
Fish.
The Cauvery and its tributaries are well stocked
with fish, which do not differ from those found in the rivers
in the low country.
Reptiles.
Among the reptiles are great numbers of lizards, several species of snakes, two or three of which are
venomous. The cobra-de-capelle is not uncommon in the
lower parts ofthe country ; a snake of a beautiful pea-green
colour with black spots, is found near Frazerpett, which is
provided with poison fangs, and is said to be deadly. The
bite of a species of snake found in Kiggutnaud is said to
produce extensive ulcers, which are difficult to heal ; scorpions and centipedes are not common ; alligators are occasionally seen in the Cauvery.
The jungle leech must not be omitted to be mentioned ,
being one ofthe greatest pests of the country ; after the first
showers of rain on the setting in of the monsoon, it is impossible to quit the road for any distance without being
covered by numbers of minute leeches, about an inch long,
and not thicker than a hair, which quickly insinuate themselve under the clothes, and fasten on the skin, their bites
often producing great irritation ; they disappear again in
the dry weather, but even then, the unwary intruder into
14 COORG
shady nooks, if moist and covered with leaves, is often
punished for his temerity.
Insects.
The entomology of Coorg if explored would
doubtless be found rich and interesting. Silk worms are not
bred ; bees are seen in vast numbers, and a considerable
quantity of wild honey and wax are found in the woods.
Roads.
Previous to the occupation of the country by the
British in 1834 , the roads were in a primitive state, wholly
impracticable for wheeled carriages, and scarcely less so for
bullocks, it having been part of the policy ofthe Rajahs, to
render their country as little accessible as possible, from an
idea common to mountaineers in all parts of the world, that
the chance of invasion and conquest, was thereby diminished,
and which to a certain extent, is undoubtedly true ; for the
same reason some of the more direct, and practicable lines
leading to Merkara the capital were shut up, and travelling
by them prohibited.
*
The only track, which was entitled to the name of a road,
commenced at Periapatam, passed through a thick jungle to
Veerajunderpett, and led by a very steep pass, known as
the Huggala, or Hinghin ghaut to Cannanore ; this road
was constructed by a party of pioneers, some years ago,
but the pass is so steep as to be nearly impracticable for bullocks, or horses, and totally so for any other species of carriage, and is in fact the worst ghaut in the south of India ;
the part of the road between Periapatam and the top of
the pass, is better constructed , and with little trouble, might
be made practicable for carriages ; but the ghaut, and the
road for eight miles from the foot of it towards Cannanore,
is not capable ofmuch improvement. This and the next mentioned road formed the line of advance ofthe southern column
of the attacking army.
From Veerajapett† a cross road leads N. N. W. to Merkara 22 miles ; this is also nearly impracticable in the wet sea- The declivity is in many places 1 in 3, seldom less than 1 in 4 ; the Ghaut is nearly 5 miles long.
+ 1,100 feet lower than Merkara.
COORG 15
son for bullocks, and totally so at all times, for carriages,
passing as it does over the ridges of all the intervening
hills. On reaching the base of the table land of Merkara,
here about 600 feet high, it ascends by a very steep, but
well made road, the declivity of which is 1 in 33, or 4 feet ;
an improvement on this line is in contemplation, and partly
executed by the superintendent of Coorg, which by following the prolongation of one of the ridges, accomplishes the
descent at the rate of 1 in 13 or 14 feet ; and effects besides
a great saving of distance.
From the bottom of the last mentioned ghaut, or pass from
the Merkara table land , branch roads lead to Nakanaad palace ,
18 miles, and to Talla Cauvery, the source of the Cauvery,
20 miles ; they are ofthe same description, as the Veerajapett road, exhibiting a contempt for all the acknowledged
principles of road making. From Talla Cauvery there is a
tolerably easy but very long pass into Malabar, called the
Thorakana ghaut.
At Periapatam commences another road, leading through
thick jungle to Nunjerajpett, near the Cauvery, and thence
to Merkara. This though traversing sundry steep acclivities,
and descents, was formerly much the most practicable and
frequented way of access, but is now totally disused.
From Merkara westward, a foot path leads to the edge of
the table land 12 miles, descends by a very steep pass called
the Talnair or Kurrunkall ghaut, 3 miles long, barely practicable for bullocks, and thence through thick jungle to
Bellarypett, and by Pootoor to Mangalore ; by this line the
north-west column of attack was to have advanced, but got
no further than Bellary- pett.
A road leading north from Merkara, branches off into
one running north-east, by Hallary to Ramasamy Conawah,
by which the principal column entered the country ; and a
second by Jumboor Bucka-at which latter place the north
16 COORG
column was repulsed -Somwarsunta, and Coodlipett, into the
Mysore district of Munjerabad.
The whole of these, are in most parts little better than
mere foot tracks, full of stones, and ruts, passing over the
steepest acclivities, without an attempt to avoid, or render
them less steep by zigzags, or turns, and in short in the very
rudest state.
Since the occupation of the country by the British, an excellent road has been made by the corps of sappers and miners, from the frontier of Frazerpett, " on the Cauvery, -where
it communicates through Periapatam or Betumdapoor, with
the great road to Bangalore -as far as Merkara; it is 25 feet
wide throughout, and in every respect admirably constructed ;
the slopes where occuring, rarely exceeding 1 foot in 14 or
15, but are generally much less.
The advantage of a good road in a military point of view,
was perhaps never more apparent, than on a late occasion
during the insurrection in Canara, where a field battery of
foot artillery, with guns, train &c. marched with ease in six
hours, from the frontier to Merkara ; the force when entering
the country in 1834, by nearly the same line, having been
four days in performing the distance .
The same line of road is continued from Merkara, by a
ghaut called the Soolea or Sumpajee ghaut, into Canara ; by
an easy slope along the north declivity of the table land, to
the head of the Sumpajee valley, -5 miles west south west of
Merkara-from whence there is a gradual slope of not more
than 1 foot, in 24 or 25, to Soolea ; from the latter place to
Bellarypett and Mangalore, the country is nearly level. The
distance by this road from Bangalore to Cannanore, and Mangalore, is less than by any of the old tappal, or dawk routes ;
and greatly facilitates the intercourse between the south of
Mysore, the whole of Coorg, and the Malabar Coast. †
ble.
1300 feet lower than Merkara.
Ofthe other passes into the country the Peria ghaut in Wynaad, is barely practica-
COORG 17
Mineral tions. produc- But little is yet known of the mineral productions ofthe country ; the iron and steel used by the natives,
are procured from Mysore.
Population.
From the subjoined table the population would
appear to be considerably on the increase ; owing in a great
measure to immigration from the neighbouring countries, on
account of a preference for the system of government recently introduced into Coorg.
No accurate accounts of the marriages, the numbers living
at different ages, or of the relative proportions of Coorgites
foreigners, slaves, &c. can be given, partly from the apathy
and ignorance, common to all native states, and partly from
a fear of exciting the suspicion of the people, if enquiry
was to be pushed too far on such subjects. The number of
slaves is however supposed to amount to between 10 and
12000, and of foreigners, the estimates have varied, from
1,500, to 3000.
C
18 COORG Population ofCoorg (Prper )fom the Jummabundee Returns for 3years .
.Coorg Other classes .
Year .
. Men
. Women
Grand
Total . Births .Deaths
1834- -35
1835- -36 1836- 37
3845 4039 3413 2907
3602717 3255 2704
3955 417 377441
138904204 10531
13271 )4533 199
1581503 15027
57569 4335 7293 8651
58987 )2323 45709 742 9034 65437 1024 8368 50410 3194 1675 1098
1749282 353 440 519 437 1204 6450 139 826 4701 81
Decrease 577
Increase inthe last year ...
calculation *Noisfounded onthis year's rturns ,not being perfectly accurate . Part ofthis increase isfrom 4354 labourers who have immigrated into the country during last year ,the abso
lute increase istherefore 2,096
COORG 19
From the foregoing table it would appear :
1st. -That the population -exclusive of immigration—has
been increasing in the ratio of 3.43 per cent, per annum.
2dly-That the births, exceed the deaths, -on the mean
of 2 years-in the ratio, of nearly 2, to 1.
3dly.--That the number of boys exceeds the number of
girls, in the ratio of 37, to 31 , but in adults, this is reversed,
the females, being to the males, as 41 , to 39 nearly the
relative ages however not being given, no deduction can be
made to account for this circumstance .
-
4thly. The proportion of deaths in the years 1835-6, was
1 in 35. and in 1836-7, only about 1 in 60 : the deaths to
births in 1835-36 were as 1 , to 2 nearly, in 1836-7 as 1 , to
3 nearly.
It is impossible to form any idea of the average longevity
of the inhabitants, natives having but vague and imperfect
notions ofdates, they however all agree in stating that men live
much longer than women, which they attribute to the early
marriages of the latter ; that more male children die, than
females ; and, that mortality among children under one year
old is great, which two last statements correspond with similar facts elsewhere.
Towns & Villages. The Coorgites have only three villages, or
towns properly so called, Merkara, Somwarpett, and Veerajunderpett ; the latter being the largest, and principally inhabited by native christians. The members of each family
live together to the number of 20, or 30, or even 60 or 70,
and when a family becomes too numerous, an additional dwelling is built in the vicinity ofthe family abode, which is generally on the side of a hill surrounded by wood, and near their
Houses. hereditary fields, to which they are much attached.
Their houses are generally substantially built, having thatched roofs, and are kept very clean and comfortable ; those of
the better sort, form a hollow square, with a small court in
Fuel the centre. Fuel is abundant in every part of .
20 COORG
the country, and upon the whole the people may be said to
be in easy circumstances, and are well provided with food ,
lodging, and raiment ; a great equality of feeling prevails
among them, and there is but little disparity in point of
wealth .
Clothing.
Their clothing is in general good, and sufficient ;
that ofthe men consists of a turban of white or blue cloth,
one or more long gowns, fitting tight roundthe body and
arms, and reaching to the feet when in dishabille , but tucked
up as high as the knee when taking exercise, and secured
round the waist with a handkerchief or shawl, over which is
worn the belt and knife peculiar to the country, and now
well known. The gown or coat is usually of thick white
cotton stuff, -more rarely blue -with red embroidery on the
shoulders ; but they prefer broad cloth when able to procure
it. The women wear one or more cloths, reaching from the
breast, to below the knee ; leaving the top of the shoulders
naked and they have usually a small white cloth round the
head.
of Physical ap- pearance the Natives.
The men, as is well known, are a handsome
athletic race, usually above the middle height,
and almost uniformly well limbed. The women are not so
tall in proportion, but stout and well looking, though rather
coarse. The complexion ofthe men varies greatly and the
women are comparatively fair.
Agriculture. Agriculture is the universal occupation of both
sexes, after labouring all day in heavy rain, during which
they are most actively employed, a general practice is, on
their return home at night, to wash the entire body with
warm water, which they say counteracts the effects of wet,
and cold ; they are however, not particularly cleanly in their
persons.
Amusements,
Customs. The principal amusements ofthe men, are hunting, and shooting ; these are followed partly from the necessity of driving away wild animals, who would otherwise destroy their cultivation ; and partly from choice. At a parti-
COORG 21
cular season of the year, they hold a solemn dance, from
which it is thought unlucky to be absent ; the men are the
only performers, the women being merely lookers on. It is
evidently a species of pyn-hie, or war dance, in which there
are interludes of single combats, the individuals being armed
with a long twig in lieu of a sword, and a shield ; the people
themselves are quite unable to give any account of the origin
of this custom.
A very singular custom exists, which is a sort of community
of wives, who are common among the brothers of a family.
On the marriage of an elder brother, his wife is considered
the property of all the others, and as the juniors successively
take wives, they in turn become common to the rest ofthe
brothers. Some curious particulars connected with this revolting custom , are detailed by Connor. Of its origin little is
known but it is said to have been owing to a comparative
scarcity ofwomen, in early times, and to have since become
sanctioned by custon ; they appear to be getting ashamed of
it, and, it is accordingly wearing out ; it may be mentioned
that this custom has tended very much to disseminate the
venereal disease ; the younger members of the family, who
resort occasionally to public women, communicating the disease to the wives of their elder brothers, and thus in successionto the whole family. Until aware of this extraordinary
custom, astonishment was excited at frequently finding elderly
and respectable people affected with gonorrhea, and syphilis.
Food.
The diet of the people principally consists of
rice, seasoned with onions, garlic, turmeric, and the other
usual ingredients of curry, and is not a little restricted by the
prejudices of caste, beef being the only kind of meat not used ;
but their economical habits prevent their consuming much
animal food, except what is the produce of the chase ; and in
the selection ofgame they are not very particular ; as they eat
the flesh of monkeys, squirrels and various other animals, not
used by Europeans.
They have usually four meals in the day ; first in the morning at 6 o'clock, and afterwards at 10, A. M. , at 2, P. M., and
22 COORG
again at 6 or 7, in the evening ; at the latter, the principal
meal, milk in various forms, but principally butter- milk, is
much used. They are not averse to spirits, and on occasions
of feasts consume it in large quantities.
Disease.
The most commondiseases are fever, dysentery,
asthma, venereal, piles, dropsy, jaundice, splenitis, and phthisis.
Fever .
Fever is mostly of the intermittent type, and
not usually of a severe form ; in the lower and jungly parts of
the country, before the commencement of the monsoon, it
assumes a more formidable character, and frequently proves
fatal. Whenrecovery takes place it is often followed byjaundice, or splenitis ; patients under these circumstances are sure
to suffer a relapse the following season, unless change of air
Dysentery. is resorted to : Dysentery is also common, and
often very fatal, especially among children ; it likewise prevails most extensively in the season preceding the monsoon.
Phthisis Phthisis is often met with, and is said usually to
occur between the ages of 20 and 40.
Variola. Variola is not unfrequent, and formerly used to
be very fatal ; but the Rajah many years ago, had all his subjects vaccinated ; the means adopted for its dissemination being
very simple, pins or needles were dipped in virus, and sent
to all parts ofthe country, with directions for the using them.
Since our occupation of the country, care has been taken to
keep up vaccination, and death from small pox is comparatively rare.
Scrophula. Scrophula is very common, usually making its
appearance at the age of puberty , in the form of swellings in
the neck to which ulceration succeeds.
Measels. Measles is common, but not severe ; and scarlet
fever is altogether unknown.
Rheumatism. Rheumatism is not uncommon, but not very
obstinate. Cases of insanity are not unusual ; and idiocy
is frequent.
COORG のの
Venereal diseases. Venereal disease-both gonorrhoea and syphilis
is very common, owing tothe circumstances before mentioned,
and to the loose state of morality, as regards the intercourse of
the sexes. Secondary symptoms are of frequent occurrence,
and very obstinate ; the people are unacquainted with any
remedies for its cure, or alleviation except some vegetables.
Primary syphilitic ulcers approach more nearly to the character ofthe true Hunterian chancre, than is often seen in
more civilized societies ; the people maintain that the disease
was unknown in the country, in any shape, previous to the
occupation of it by the Honorable Company's troops, and
give as a reason, that they were not allowed to quit the country ; and that strangers were prohibited from entering it.
Ulcers &c.
Ulcers, and cutaneous diseases are both common and difficult of cure.
Diseases of wo- men.
The only diseases peculiar to women, are irregu
larities of the catamenial discharge generally caused by exposure to cold ; and they are said to suffer occasionally from dropsical swellings during pregnancy, which produce abortion about the 6th month. Women are considered to be less healthy, and shorter lived than men, attributed
to the community of wives above mentioned ; as well as
to early marriages. The great mortality among children
below one year old, is chiefly from bowel complaints, but no
diseases are stated to be peculiar to them.
science.
State of Medical Medicine is in a very rude and simple state ;
there are no hakeems or persons who practice it exclusively,
and most if not all diseases are attributed to the influence ofan
evil eye, or the anger ofthe gods* ; curative measures principally consists in prayers, incantations, and offerings to idols.
No prejudice whatever exists against European medicines,
or practice, and people resort readily to the medical officer
at Merkara, for advice or assistance ; like all natives however,
The natives rarely admit, that any place is unhealthy ; but they say that occasion- ally, the devil occasions fever of a malignant description" iu certain places.
24 COORG
they want patience to submit to any lengthened course of
treatment, and generally return to their homes, if a cure is
not effected in a few days.
Materia medica.
The materia medica though simple, and confined to plants found in the jungles, is not without efficacy
in mild cases, particularly of a local description.
The following is a list of their chief " remedies. "
Name. Part used.
Hittee Beejah .... Kernel of fruit………..
Thoomba Geedoh.. Expressed juice of the leaves..
Kodin Kittolee.
Nassoomannee Baroo..
Seepawaruthoo Sigooroo Poda Bellee
Mavin Beejah....
do.
do.
do.
do.
Medical effects.
In small doses of 5 or 10 grains,
astringent febrifuge ; in large doses narcotic and poisonous.
Expectorant ; for coughs.
Febrifuge, diaphoretic, (ordinary fever. )
Febrifuge, (continued fever. )
Astringent, tonic, (chronic dysen- tery. )
Sedative, antispasmodic, (in colic. )
Fruit, bark and Astringent, tonic, vermifuge (in root..
Gajeegatha Gada... Juice of leaves.....
*Numaree Baroo .. Root...
Kareemartha Sadysentery and worms. )
Diuretic (in dropsy. )
Febrifuge, diaphoretic (fever and venereal disease. )
Juice of leaves ..... Purgative.
do.
Juice of leaves ingooroo ... Sakee Suppoo .
Thasula Hoo..... ternally and externally.
Dalinba Sigooroo. Dɔ. internally .
Havin Sapoo.
do.
+Haleela Beejah .. Seeds.
Diseases of cattle.
Diuretic (in dropsy. )
Cooling, demulcent, purgative (in ophthalmia and local inflammations. )
Refrigerant, stomachic.
Refrigerant (in erugtive diseases. )
Purgative.
Cattle as before observed do not thrive in Coorg;
horses are subject in the wet weather, to a disease of the
throat resembling laryngitis, which frequently proves fatal in
a few hours, even when very active measures are resorted
to. The best remedy is bleeding ad deliquium, and firing
Periploca Indica or country Sarsaparilla, a valuable substitute for the more expen- sive American article.
+ Probably the same as the hirleela-siyah, a common and very excellent purgative,
used in Persia.
MERKARA 25
the throat*. The Rajah was always in the habit of sending
his horses to the frontiers during the monsoon, and it is said,
that even his elephants suffered if kept at Merkara.
Bullocks are subject to the same disease, but in them it
comes on more insidiously, and though equally fatal , does
not run its course so rapidly as in horses ; it generally commences with purging, which is succeeded by swelling of the
throat ; occasionally when the animal seems about to recover,
ulcers form on the legs, and the hoofs drop off. No cure is
known for this complaint, which occurs at all seasons of the
year.
It seems difficult to assign a cause for the uncongeniality
of the climate to these aninals ; the damp atmosphere alone
does not satisfactorily account for it, as the climate of many
countries in Europe-England for example-famous for the
breed of cattle , horses and sheep, is as damp as that of Coorg,
during a portion ofthe year. Cattle are fed exclusively on
dry straw, and grass.
No information has been obtained as to the diseases of
plants used as food , either by the people, or the cattle , with
the exception of rice, which is subject to blight in particular
situations, but is never used as food afterwards.
MERKARA,
Situation.
Merkara, or Muddykeree, as it is pronounced
by the natives, is the modern capital of Coorg, the fort of "" NOTE. -It should have been stated under the head of Vegetable productions ' that an attempt to introduce the tea plant, by seedlings from Calcutta, totally failed, all the plants having withered. This may probably have been owing to want of experience in the cultivators, as a plant given to Colonel Crewe on the Neilgerries, and afterwards transplanted to Manantoddy, and from thence to Merkara, was healthy and covered with blossoms in April 1837.
* Several valuable horses belonging to officers ofthe 36th Regimeut N. I. having died of this complaint at Merkara in 1834, it has since been the invariable custom to send these animals to Frazerpett or Hoonsoor, in the monsoon. A fine arab brought from Tabreez in Persia which had been in the possession of an officer six years, without a
day's illness, was carried off by the disease ; he was attacked at 7 in the morning, and died at 9 at night, notwithstanding bleeding, blistering, &c. , the attack commenced with wheezing, and difficulty of breathing attended with swelling of the throat which gradu- ally increased, ( without however producing any febrile symptoms) till it terminated in suffocation.
D
26 COORG
which was built by Typoo Sultan A. D. 1782 ; the ancient
capital of the province having been the town of Hallary, five
miles north- east of Merkara : it is distant from Madras viâ
Seringapatam, and Bangalore, 352 miles, from Bangalore 145,
from Mysore 70, and from Cananore 68 miles.
Surrounding country &c.
The hills around Merkara, arise abruptly from
the surrounding country, forming an oblong table land, at
the south-east angle of which is situated Merkara ; the fort
being built on the levelled summit of a small isolated hill.
On the east and north, the hills have a gentle declivity,
their sides being clothed with wood ; but on the south they
are abrupt, precipitous and nearly naked, descending to the
low or Southern division of Coorg, to the depth of from 4 to
600 feet.
On the west, the table land is elevated about 3,000 feet
above the low country of Umrsoolea. A remarkable peculiarity of the hills is the extreme narrowness oftheir terminal
ridges, which are frequently only a few feet broad, and descend abruptly on each side. They are all of a rounded form,
and none rise more than 2, or 300 feet above Merkara. The
table land to the west, is broken into numberless small
rounded eminences, like reversed tea-cups, the valleys
being filled with wood, forming a succession of very picturesque, and pleasing scenery. Apeculiarity of the numerous
streams found in these valleys, is that they in general flow to
to the westward, although their sources in many instances
are within a few yards of the declivity of the western ghauts ;
the country of Coorg resembling in this, as in many ofits
general features -although on a smaller scale-the western
parts ofthe Neilgherries.
None ofthe ranges of hills in Coorg appear to possess superior advantages to Merkara itself, in a sanatory point of
view.
A small river which falls into the Haringhee rises close
to Merkara; there are no lakes, morasses or canals in the
neighbourhood.
MERKARA 27
Watar.
Water is supplied partly from the river abovementioned, and partly from numerous springs in the immediate vicinity of the town and fort, the water from two of
which is collected in large stone tanks ; and a well of good
water also issues from the hill, on which the fort is situated.
Fort and can- tonment. The fort is placed as before observed, on the
summit of a naturally isolated hill, which has been partially
levelled ; the soil being litho- margic earth of the same description, as that generally found throughout the country ;
it is distant not more than 150 yards from the boundary
ridge ofthe table land on the south, with which it is artificially connected by a mound. Onthe south and south- west slopes
of the hill, and below the fort, are the sepoys lines, not
very regularly disposed , but tolerably clean and airy, having
a stream of running water in the valley immediately below
them ; the huts are ofthe description usually erected by sepoys,
wattle and mud, with thatched roofs . The regimental bazaar
is on the same side of the hill ; and on the north side is another artificial mound connecting the hill with the native pettah or great bazaar, which forms a street of good houses,
about three quarters of a mile in length, and terminated_by
two buildings, the tombs of the late Rajahs.
The Fort is an irregular polygon of seven sides, at each of
six ofthe angles ofwhich is a round bastion, and at the seventh,
a gate-way ; it is surrounded by a single strong wall of stone,
about 12 feet high, by 10 thick ; with a parapet of masonry
5 feet high, and 4 thick ; below the wall on the south, and
west sides, is a fausse-braye, and an imperfect ditch ; the
principal gate is in the east front, and there is a sally port in
the north-west angle. There is no well or tank within the
fort, though a good spring issues from the base of the hill
on the north west, which might probably be struck by boring
or sinking a shaft* ; great care has been taken in constructing
drains, and the fort is at all times perfectly dry and clean.
* Besides this defect it is considered valueless , as a place of defence, against disciplin- ed troops, being commanded from numerous points , within breaching distance ; and could moreover be easily escaladed .
28 COORG
The outer gate leads to an oblong square, one side ofwhich
is occupied by a public bungalow for travellers, the Dewans'
cutcherry, and the jail .
Jail.
The latter building forms a square , each side of
which is 82 feet in length, it encloses a small open court, and
is surrounded by a verandah 9 feet wide ; it contains, 2 large
wards, one 42 feet by 19, the other 28, by 20 ; and 3 smaller
ones, which are usually occupied as an hospital, and as convalescent wards ; a kitchen and store room are also attached
to it . The wards are all 8 feet high, and have windows 3 feet
by 2; the guard room is in front, and the necessary behind,
with a deep cess pool adjoining, into which quick lime is
thrown at stated intervals, to destroy offensive effluvia. It is
a substantial building well adapted for the purposes of a jail ,
and affords ample accommodation for 100 prisoners.
At the angle of the square is a large and handsome building occupied as a cutcherry, and the Superintendents residence.
The second and third gateways being connected, as usual in
native forts, by a traverse, lead into the inner square of the
fort, which is partly flagged with granite ; the south side was
formerly occupied by the old palace of the Rajah, but being
ruinous, has lately been pulled down. '
Rajah's palace. Directly opposite the gate- way, is the new palace,
a large square substantial building having numerous windows
in front, and built much in the style of a french chateau.
The palace is constructed on a plan much superior to the
generality of native buildings, though there is a want of
light in the upper and back rooms, which formed the zenanah.
The whole upper story, and a portion ofthe lower front, is
allotted as the officers ' quarters, and mess-room ; and in the
rear is the public treasury ; there are also numerous store
rooms, &c.
Barracks. The barracks of the small detachment of European artillery consisting of 22 men, are situated in the lower
story ofthe north-west angle of the palace, fronting outwards ;
MERKARA 29
their barrack room is 23 feet long, by 26 wide, and 13 high,
having one large window, and one door ; the old hospital and
guard room are adjoining, being separated only by a partition.
The barracks are sufficient for the accommodation of the
party now occupying them, but could hardly afford room
for a greater number. The space in rear of the palace,
is occupied by a powder magazine ; the cardamon godowns,
and two small detached buildings with terraced roofs, which
have been converted into solitary cells. The latter are dry
and airy, though rather cold in the monsoon ; no disease
has been traced to them.
Hospital,
The new hospital lately erected , is about 30
yards from the south curtain of the fort, with which it communicates by a sally port, the space between being the remains ofthe glacis, part of which has been cut away, to make
room for the buildings ; but before a good foundation could
be obtained a perpendicular escarpment was requisite to be cut
to the depth of 15 feet ; the floor of the hospital is therefore
15 feet below the foot ofthe curtain, and the face of the escarpment constitutes a bank of that height immediately in front of
the north verandah.
It is a long tiled building consisting of a native , and an European ward, a surgery, and three verandah rooms, enclosed
by a verandah 10 feet wide. The native ward is 82 feet, by
21, with a fire place at each end, the doors are 8 feet high,
and 4 broad, having swinging glass ventilators above the windows, which are provided with venetians.
feet high.
The walls are 16
At the west end is the European ward, 25 feet by 21, with
a bath room offthe south verandah, the windows are similar to
those in the native ward, provided also with venetian shutters, and glass swinging ventilators, there is a fire place also in
this ward. A bath room, and a dead room, are attached
to the hospital, both of which are 101, by 81 ; they communicate with each other, and each has a glass window 4 by 3
30 COORG
feet, facing the south ; and there are separate cook rooms
for the natives, and Europeans, and also necessaries.
Population.
The population of Merkara, with the exception
of a few of the higher class of natives who occasionally reside there, is composed almost entirely of the military, with
their numerous dependents and followers, and Mysoreans,
who are generally shop-keepers and tradesmen ; the subjoined remarks therefore apply principally to the military.
Disease.
By far the most prevalent diseases are fevers
generally ofthe intermittent type, and dysentery ; next to
which in frequency is rheumatism.
Fever.
Fever, except occasionally in the cold season, is
neither severe nor obstinate, yielding to the ordinary remedies ; it is generally of the quotidian type, and seldom
produces engorgements ofthe spleen or liver ; the exciting
cause can generally be traced to exposure to alternations of
temperature ; for in the monsoon season when the climate is
equable, it is rarely seen ; but in the cold weather the disease
is now and then complicated with congestion, or inflammation
of the lungs, and is then much more formidable . Natives
bear depletion better in this climate, than in the low country.
Europeans are not particularly subject to fever, at any season
of the year.
Dysentery. Dysentery is generally produced by imprudence
in diet, or from sleeping on damp ground ; it is exceedingly common among children, but is rarely fatal, except when
it has existed for some time previous to applying for assistance.
The application of a few leeches to the abdomen, and the
use of ipecacuanha with extract of gentian generally checks
the disease in a few days.
Few cases of dysentery have been met with in Europeans,
these were however obstinate ; but when the force first entered the country, it was very prevalent, and severe. The
climate appears to be inimical to persons suffering from relaxed bowels, particularly if complicated with congestion of
the liver.
MERKARA 31
Rheumatism, Rheumatism is not usually severe, and strange
as it may appear, least frequent in the wet season ; it now and
then becomes necessary to send convalescents from this complaint out of the country for a short time, to prevent relapses.
Wounds and ulcers.
Wounds and ulcers are exceedingly troublesome,
and frequently slow in healing ; the latter in particular sometimes resist every plan of treatment, including active constitutional remedies, and require change of air for their cure.
affections.
Cuianeous. Cutaneous diseases are rather common, and
somewhat obstinate ; psora is very prevalent, and a few cases
of leprosy have been seen.
Cholera.
Cholera has not been known as an epidemic, for
many years, but three or four sporadic cases have been met
with.
Variola and varicella .
Variola is not common, vaccination having been
pretty extensively practised, though not without great difficulty, as it frequently fails even in the dry season , and in
wet weather seldom succeeds.
Varicella is common, but mild.
Measles and scarlet fever.
Neither measles, or scarlatina, have come under observation.
Worms.
Worms are very common in children, probably
from the use of raw vegetables.
On the whole, as before observed, the climate must be pronounced highly favourable to the European constitution ; and
but little less so to the natives of the plains, at least after
a short residence. There are no diseases which are considered
peculiar to any class of the inhabitants.
Diseases of prisoners.
The most common complaints amongst the inmates of the jail, are dysentery and fever, both, as might be
anticipated, more obstinate and severe, than in the military, or
free inhabitants. Subsequent to the late insurrection in Canara
when the number of prisoners was greatly increased, they
32 COORG
amounted for some time to 500 and upwards, and were consequently a good deal crowded, the mortality was very high,
14 having died within a very short time, every mode of treatment appeared to be equally unavailing. Most of the sufferers were natives of Umrsoolia below the ghauts, and the
complete change of climate and food, doubtless had much
effect in producing both the disease , and the unfavorable
result.
The following tables shew the nature and amount of disease
and mortality which have occurred amongst the native troops
at this station from 1835, when first garrisoned, till 1843, a
period of nine years ; and also amongst a body of prisoners
kept here since 1836, a period of eight years.
MERKARA 33
Table exhibiting the number ofadmissions and deaths amongst
the Native troops stationed at Merkara, during a period
of nine years, from 1835 to 1843 inclusive.
Aggregate strength.
8902.
CLASSES. DISEASES.
Admitted .
Died .
Admissions each from class .
Deaths from each class .
Per cntage of sick totrength .
Per cntage of deaths tosick .
19 18 254 1 169 Fevers..
Febrisephemera 337 intermit quot. [ 1217]
tertiana.. 10 30 remittens 23 ,, com : cont.... 18. 10152
16251
Cholera.. 7 4 4
Diarrhoea.. 156 3
Dysenteria acu- ta et chronica.. 101 Diseases of Colica... 93 the abdo- Obstipatio... 10 minal vis- Dyspepsia.. 63 cera...... Splenitis . 6
Gastritis . 3
Hæmorrhois. 20 Hepatitis... 4
00000000
456 13
(Catarrhus.. 54
Diseases of
Asthma .. Phthisis pulmo- nalis.... the lungs.
Pneumonia.....
27
Hydrothorax.. Dyspnoea...
2924
20 2522
9838
Diseases of the brain.
Apoplexia.. Epilepsia.. Paralysis... Mánia.. Tetanus ..
1723 52
Delirium Tre- mens.....
Variola... 21 Eruptive fe- Varicella.... vers ......
Dropsies .... Ascites.........
Rheumatic Rheumatacutus affections. et chronicus.. 374
Syphilis primi40 Rubeola.. 13 Erysipelas.... 2033
1100
Anasarca.... 51
60
0 078 57 142
5 122 2 .850
13 1 100 13 265
.1death 286 and ,Ulcus 490 Phlogosis were number Ofthis *
.0.808 strength deaths toofPer cntage
0 584 11 538)
58 1 0 .651 1 724
52 6 0 584 11 538!
5 374 5 4 201 1 336
tiva... "" consecutiva.. 47
Venereal af-J Gonorrhoea.. fections .. Hernia humora224231
000
163 1 1 831 0 613
lis .
41 1
Strictura ure- thræ....... 2
Specific dis- eases .....
Lepra...... Elephantiasis.. Dracunculus.. Atrophia.. Scrophula..
2228
1135
0002
65 2 0 730 0 076
...
Morbi oculorum 43 43 0 .483 0 000
Cutis..... 603 603 0 6 773 0 .000 39
Other diseases.. 1535 2 *1535 2 17 243 0 130
Total .... 5131 72 5131 72 57 638 1 403
E
34 COORG .
JAIL OF MERKARA.
Table exhibiting the number of Admissions and Deaths of
the convicted prisoners. from each class of disease, from 1836 to 1843 inclusive.
Aggregate strength.
CLASSES.
446.
Admitted .
Died .
Totaladmissions from each class .
Total deaths from each class .
ofPer cntage sick strength to
ofPer cntage deaths tosick .
445 9 99 775 2 .022
2 0 896 50 000
197 8 44 170 4 060
DISEASES.
Febrisephemera 59 Fevers...... "9 int. quot.... 380 " remittens . 1
"" com cont... 5
7092
Cholera..... 4 4
( Diarrhoea.. 63 Dysenteria. 64 Diseases of Colica... 49 the abdo- Dyspepsia.
minal vis- Icterus .
сега...... Hæmorrhois.
16
Splenitis.
Hepatitis..
Diseases of Cynanche... Catarrhus.
the lungs Asthma... Pneumonia.
31132
Diseases of Cephalalgia.
the brain. Epilepsia.. 5
Eruptive fe- Variola....
3300LUCO 1710
vers...... Varicella.....
Rheumatismus . 65
Dropsies.... Anasarca..... Ascites...
11
13
51 4 11 434 7843 Per cntage ofdeaths tostrength 7-174 .
=
2 2 466 18 181
8 0 1 748 0 000
65 2 14 573 3 .076
3 3 0 672 100 000
fections.. Venereal af- ( Syphilis . Gonorrhoea.. Hernia..... 0
0 896 0 000
Specific Lepra.. 1
diseases.. Atrophia.. 2 2 0 448 100 000
Morbi oculorum 11 0! 11!
"" cutis...... 47 0 47
0 2.466
0 10 538
0 000
0 .000
Other diseases.. 265 0 265
Total.. 1113] 32 1113
0 59 417
32 249 551
0 .000
2 .875
* Of this number were Phlogosis 77, ulcers 122.
FRAZERPETT. 35
General des- cription.
FRAZERPETT.
Frazerpett having been occupied for a considerable time, by a large detachment of sappers and miners
employed in making the great road to Merkara, a few words
respecting it may be considered interesting. It occupies
nearly the site of a fort commenced by Tippoo Sultan, called
Jafferabad, or Khooshat-nuggur, which however was never
finished, and is now in ruins ; situated on the left bank of
the Cauvery, in a bend formed by a sudden turn of the river,
opposite the Mysore frontier, and 19 miles east by north from
Merkara, its elevation being about 1300 feet above the sea.
The soil is alluvial, but is well drained ; it is
surrounded by jungle, not however very dense.
Soil.
From its position the climate is hotter than that of Merkara, but during the monsoon it is extremely pleasant, as
very little rain falls there, and the heat of the sun is moderated by constant clouds, and light fogs.
Climate.
The nights are cool and pleasant, nor is the sun
ever very oppressive at any season, except for an hour or two
at mid-day ; and notwithstanding its being surrounded by
jungle, it is decidedly a very healthy spot. The disease ofthe
detachment have been few in number, chiefly slight fever,
and bowel complaints, and attended with but a verytrifling
mortality.
METEOROLOGICAL REGISTER.
The instruments with which the subjoined observations
were made, were placed in a detached building, over the
inner gate of the fort, perfectly isolated, and open to atmospheric influences on every side. The roof is covered with a
thick thatch, and the sides venetianed ; the interior is four
and half feet square ; the instruments being suspended on a
frame in the centre, three and a half feet from the ground.
The barometer was made by Newman ; and of the thermometers, one was made by Jones, one by Robinson, and a third
by Dolland, all agreeing exactly in their indications . The
pluviometer (Howards) is kept on the outside of the same
Platform.
36 COORG.
Months.
Monthly Abstract of the daily atmospherical Register kept at
Mean tem- Mean pressure | Mean of hygrometer at 10 A. M. |
perature Thermo- meter.
Barometer corrected to 32°.
Fahrenheit. Fahrenheit.
6A.M.
10A.M.
A.10M.
5P.M.
Wet Bulb .
Difference .
Quantity ofmoisture .
Dryness .
Dew point .
Total rain inches -.
evaporation Mean in 24hours .
Prevailing winds .
1835.
June.... 66.7 69.9 44.77 20 W. N. W.
July.... 65.4 67.7 26.000 25.970 18.5 1.28 223.1 28.4 17.2 20.80 039 W. N. W.
August..... 65 68 26.007 25.980 18.6 1 . 220.
2524
September.. 64 68 26.050 26.010 18.3 1.8 210. 40 17.
17.4 23.25 030 W. N. W. W. N. W. E. N. E. 13.53 030 N. N. E.
[October..... 65 68 26.070 26.020 18.8 2 220. 40 W. S. W. 16.5 10.24 035 E. N. E.
November... 63 67 26.115 26.080 17.7 2.8 200. 60 14.5 2.18 E. N. E. 045 N. N. E.
December... 56 e64 26.140 | 26.100 13.3 3.4 140. 75
698.9 N. E.
1836.
January. 53 64 26.160 26.100 11. 4.1 100. 120 2.2 N. N. E.
February.... 56 69 26.172 26.135 12.5 7. 115. 160 2. 100 E. N. E.
March.. ..... 61
April........ 64 75
73 26.140 26.070 13.4 8.5 130. 154 1.1 02 105 N.E.N.W.
26.103 26.056 18.3 5.2 210. 134 13. 187 057 W. N. W.
May.. 64 72 26.090 26.040 19.2 3.2 212. 64 16. 248 052 N. N. W.
Gen. means. 61.9 68. 26.9726.051 16.3 3.6 188. 81. 11.4 052
Total ofrain 119.14.
METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. 37
Merkara, from 1st June 1835, to 31st May 1836.
General Remarks.
The monsoon set in on the 31st May, but was not violent till towards the end of the month. The mornings were damp and foggy, heavy showers occurring in the evening. The last six days the rain fell in torrents.
The monsoon continued very mild during this month, with intervals of fair weather. The equability of the temperature (the daily range not exceeding 4°) |
is remarkable.
The early part of the month was foggy, with little rain, on the 11th the monsoon set in and continued with little intermission, till the end of the month.
The rain continued steady till towards the end of the month, when the wind changed to the east and the rain diminished. The period of the equinox was marked by heavy thunder storms.
The early part of the month was damp and foggy with occasional rain, about the 20th the wind settled on the N. E. quarter, and it became colder. Heavy rain from N. E. on the last few days.
The north-east monsoon gradually cleared off, and may be said to have terminated about the 17th with a heavy thunder storm ; the weather then became cold and foggy with high winds.
The early part of the month continued foggy and damp, but afterwards cleared up,
and became bright and fine, with very high winds, mornings and evenings very cold.
The weather throughout this month was bright and clear, mornings and evenings cold, heat of the sun tempered during the day by a constant cold wind from N. E., often amounting to a storm.
Much the same as last month, but rather hotter in the middle ofthe day, and less wind. The hygrometrical state of the atmosphere varied remarkably (dew point varying from 13,2 to 7. without evident cause.
First part of the month dry and warm, latter cloudy and close ; a good deal of thunder. Dew point varied from 16.8 to x 17.
Occasionally dry and cool at Merkara ; much rain fell all round, a few thunder storms.
Amost delightful month, weather cool, clear and fine, much less rain than usual, a
great deal of sheet lightning with but little thunder.
The monsoon was later than usual on setting in, and can hardly be said to have begun till the 19th. The quantity of rain also did not amount to halfthe fall in the corresponding month of last year. For a considerable portion of the month, the air has been so saturated with moisture, as to afford no indication by the hygrometer. The troops continue (as usual at this season) very healthy.
The monsoon has continued without intermission during the month, and the wea- ther has been most disagreeable, exercise being almost totally precluded. The troops are very healthy, out of 12 cases in hospital, 9 are accidents.
The monsoon has continued without intermission throughout the month, with almost constant rain or fog, and high winds, the air being intensely damp, and the sun scarcely ever visible. The troops continue extremely healthy.
The monsoon continued but with diminished violence, when the weather cleared up, and has since been fine and clear with occasional fogs, and thunder storms ; the windis drawing gradually round to the northward, and the nights are becoming cold, a few cases ofrheumatism and fever among natives, have presented themselves, attended with determination to the head and chest ; this is usual on all changes of the weather.
The weather during this month has been unusually fine dry and clear, with high cold winds from the N. E. so much so, as tooccasion apprehensions of a deficiency ofwater for cultivation. The number of cases of slight fever, and rheuma- tism among natives, has also as usual in sudden changes ofweather, consi- derably increased, but they are generally mild and yield to the usual simple remedies.
The N. E. monsoon may be said to have almost failed in this quarter. The wea- ther during the month except a few casual showers, has been clear dry and cold. Fevers are becoming less frequent, and the troops are in general healthy.
The weather during the whole ofthis month, with the exception of twolight show- ers, and occasional fogs, has been dry and clear, the mornings and evenings cold,
with towards the latter part, storms of wind from E. and N. E., the troops con- tinue very healthy, a few cases of rheumatism and fever of a slight description notwithstanding.
The weather during the past month has been uniformly clear cold and dry, with very high cold winds. The number of cases of fever has some what increased,
with a tendency in some instances to congestion of the lungs.
The weather throughout this month has been intensely dry and latterly very warm,
the season being more than six weeks earlier than usual. The scanty monsoon
of last year now begins to be severely felt, causing drought all over the country.
The troops continue healthy.
The weather during this month has been unusually close and hot, at least six weeks in advance of the two preceding seasons, water very scarce in many places ; a
considerable number of cases of fever with determination to the chest occurred after the showers, on the 5th and 6th, since which the troops have been as usual healthy.
This month has been warm and pleasant ; but few showers have fallen, which is unusual at this season.
The early part of the month was warm and close , with a few heavy showers. The monsoon set in on the 25th (unusually early) with a heavy thunder storm,
but as yet only a small quantity of rain has fallen, slight fever and bowel com
plaint, have been common among the followers and prisoners in the jail, but have not prevailed among the military.